© The Marvelous Quran 2024. 
This is copyrighted material. Duplication or copying or sharing without prior written approval is strictly prohibited. 
1 
 
YT182 Allahh alone, Not Quran alone! 
Part 7 
The Riddle of the Pomegranate in the Quran!  
What is al-3assr in Surah 103 سُورَة الْعَصْ  ? 
 
The series on Sulaymān is a PREREQUISITE to this series. 
This segment (and this series) is NOT for Entertainment!  
This is a serious Academic presentation that is filled with advanced 
concepts and QurꜤānic Insights.  
THIS SEGMENT IS NOT FOR THE WEAK OR THE NOVICE! 
Perhaps YouTube is NOT the best platform to present this 3ilm, but 
Time is short and an impending danger is fast approaching:  
I need to get as much of this 3ilm as possible in front of as many 
people as possible! 
 
In This Segment: 
1. Āya 55:68 
2. Āya 6:141 
3. Āya 6:99 
4. CONCLUSION: Surprising Understanding of Sūrah 103 
(Al-Ɛassr) 
  © The Marvelous Quran 2024. 
This is copyrighted material. Duplication or copying or sharing without prior written approval is strictly prohibited. 
2 
 
DISCLAIMERS – PLEASE READ: 
1. THIS SERIES IS VERY ADVANCED! THERE IS NO EASY 
WAY TO PRESENT IT! BUT THIS SERIES IS NOT FOR 
ELEMENTARY STUDENTS OF QURAN! 
2. Do not assume that you already know what these Ayats mean! 
3. We make extensive use of: 
a. Nested Interpretation 
b. Abrahamic Locution 
c. Tafseel (Divarication) 
d. The Organic QurꜤānic Methodology 
4. If you are NOT familiar with how we engage the QurꜤān, this 
segment, and the rest of this series will not make any sense to 
you! 
5. In that case, please watch the videos on this channel starting 
from the YT46. 
6. You must watch the series on Sulayman before watching this 
series 
7. Watch YT93 before you can appreciate what we conclude in 
this segment, and the rest of this series. 
 
  © The Marvelous Quran 2024. 
This is copyrighted material. Duplication or copying or sharing without prior written approval is strictly prohibited. 
3 
 
Āya 55:68  
[Ref. To “YT148 A New Interpretation of Surah Ar-
Rahman: Quran Chapter 55. Stunning Imagery, 
Soothing Rhythm” for full translation of Sūrah 55] 
55:68 فِيهِمَا فََٰكِهَةٌ وَنََْلٌ وَرُمَّانٌ  
In both (of the pre-requisite concealed abodes of privileged understanding) are 
witty speech, and sifted stories of messengers and prophets, and rectified (i.e., 
corrected) stories. 
 
 
  © The Marvelous Quran 2024. 
This is copyrighted material. Duplication or copying or sharing without prior written approval is strictly prohibited. 
4 
 
Āya 6:141 
وَهُوَٱلََِّّى    جَنََّٰتٍ مَّعْرُوشََٰتٍ وَغَيَْْ مَعْرُوشََٰتٍ وَ 
َ
نشَأ 
َ
أٱلنَّخْلَ   وَ ٱلزَّرْعَ  كُلُهُ 
ُ
مُُْتَلِفًا أ ۥ وَ ٱ لزَّيْتُونَ  وَ ٱ لرُّمَّانَ   
مُتَشََٰبِهًا  وَغَيَْْ مُتَشََٰبِهٍ كُُُوا مِن ثَمَرِهِ ۦ   ثْمَرَ وَءَاتُوا حَقَّهُ 
َ
إِذَا  أۥ  يَوْمَ حَصَادِهِ ۦ  وَلََ تُسِْْفُو ا إِنَّهُ ۥ لََ يُُِبُّ  
ٱلْمُسِْْفِيَ  (6:141) 
Sahih International: And He it is who causes gardens to grow, [both] trellised and 
untrellised, and palm trees and crops of different [kinds of] food and olives and 
pomegranates, similar and dissimilar. Eat of [each of] its fruit when it yields and give its 
due [zakah] on the day of its harvest. And be not excessive. Indeed, He does not like 
those who commit excess. 
Pickthall: He it is Who produceth gardens trellised and untrellised, and the date-
palm, and crops of divers flavour, and the olive and the pomegranate, like and unlike. 
Eat ye of the fruit thereof when it fruiteth, and pay the due thereof upon the harvest day, 
and be not prodigal. Lo! Allah loveth not the prodigals. 
Yusuf Ali: It is He Who produceth gardens, with trellises and without, and dates, and 
tilth with produce of all kinds, and olives and pomegranates, similar (in kind) and 
different (in variety): eat of their fruit in their season, but render the dues that are 
proper on the day that the harvest is gathered. But waste not by excess: for Allah loveth 
not the wasters. 
M.A.S. Abdul Haleem: It is He who produces both trellised and untrellised 
gardens, date palms, crops of diverse flavours, the olive, the pomegranate, alike yet 
different. So when they bear fruit, eat some of it, paying what is due on the day of 
harvest, but do not be wasteful: God does not like wasteful people. 
Sam Guerrans: And He it is that produces gardens, trellised and untrellised, and 
the date-palms, and crops diverse in their food, and the olive and the pomegranate, 
similar yet different. Eat of the fruit thereof when it bears fruit, and render its due2 on 
the day of its harvest; and commit not excess, He loves not the committers of excess. 
Muhamad Asad: For it is He who has brought into being gardens – [both] the 
cultivated ones and those growing wild – and the date-palm, and fields bearing 
multiform produce, and the olive tree, and the pomegranate: [all] resembling one 
another and yet so different! Eat of their fruit when it comes to fruition, and give [unto 
the poor] their due on harvest day. And do not waste [God’s bounties]: verily, He does 
not love the wasteful! 
Mohsin Khan: And it is He Who produces gardens trellised and untrellised, and date-
palms, and crops of different shape and taste (its fruits and its seeds) and olives, and © The Marvelous Quran 2024. 
This is copyrighted material. Duplication or copying or sharing without prior written approval is strictly prohibited. 
5 
 
pomegranates, similar (in kind) and different (in taste). Eat of their fruit when they ripen, 
but pay the due thereof (its Zakat, according to Allah's Orders 1/10th or 1/20th) on the 
day of its harvest, and waste not by extravagance. Verily, He likes not Al-Musrifun (those 
who waste by extravagance), 
Arberry: It is He who produces gardens trellised, and untrellised, palm-trees, and 
crops diverse in produce, olives, pomegranates, like each to each, and each unlike to 
each. Eat of their fruits when they fructify, and pay the due thereof on the day of its 
harvest; and be not prodigal; God loves not the prodigal. 
 
 
Marvelous QurꜤān Translation of Āya 6:141: 
وَهُوَٱلََِّّى    
َ
نشَأ 
َ
أجَنََّٰتٍ مَّعْرُوشََٰتٍ وَغَيَْْ مَعْرُوشََٰتٍ  وَ ٱلنَّخْلَ  وَ ٱلزَّرْعَ  كُلُهُ 
ُ
مُُْتَلِفًا أ ۥ 
وَ ٱلزَّيْتُونَ  وَ ٱلرُّمَّانَ  مُتَشََٰبِهًا وَغَيَْْ مُتَشََٰبِهٍ   كُُُوا مِن ثَمَرِهِ ۦ   ثْمَرَ 
َ
إِذَا  أوَءَاتُوا حَقَّهُ ۥ يَوْمَ 
حَصَادِهِ ۦ وَلََ تُسِْْفُو ا إِنَّهُ ۥ لََ يُُِبُّ ٱلْمُسِْْفِيَ  (6:141 ) 
And it is he (Allahh) who caused gardens (concealed abodes of 
privileged understanding) to grow, trained by weltanschauung and 
untrained by weltanschauung, and ‘Nakhl’ (i.e., sifted stories of 
messengers and prophets), and planted crops (i.e., concepts that could be 
applied to new sections, i.e., results of nested interpretations) with 
different (purposes of) consumption, and ‘olives’, and ‘Rum-mān 
(rectified stories) that look similar and (but in reality) dissimilar (to 
earlier versions of such stories). Consume of (each of) its fruit when it 
produces, and allow (others) to learn at the time of its harvest. And be 
not with ulterior motives: Indeed, he does not like those who act with 
ulterior motives. 
 
 
  © The Marvelous Quran 2024. 
This is copyrighted material. Duplication or copying or sharing without prior written approval is strictly prohibited. 
6 
 
Āya 6:99 
وَهُوَٱلََِّّى   نزَلَ مِنَ 
َ
أٱ لسَّمَا ءِ  خْرَجْنَا بِهِ 
َ
مَا ءً فَأۦ خْرَجْنَا مِنْهُ خَضًِِا نَُّْرِجُ مِنْهُ حَبًّا  
َ
ِ شََْءٍ فَأ 
نَبَاتَ كُل 
مُّتَََاكِبًا وَمِنَ  ٱلنَّخْلِ   عْنَابٍ وَ 
َ
مِن طَلْعِهَا قِنْوَانٌ دَانِيَةٌ وَجَنََّٰتٍ ملِنْ أ ٱ لزَّيْتُونَ  وَ ٱلرُّمَّانَ  مُشْتَبِهًا  وَغَيَْْ  
مُتَشََٰبِهٍ  ٱنظُرُو ا  إِلَََٰ ثَمَرِهِ ۦ   ثْمَرَ وَيَنْعِهِ 
َ
إِذَا  أۦ   إِنَّ فِِ ذََٰلِكُمْ لََيََٰتٍ للِقَوْمٍ يُؤْمِنُونَ  ﴿99:6﴾ -  الَنعام 
مُتَشََٰبِهًا  :1ya 6:14ĀFrom  Note that, 
Sahih International: And it is He who sends down rain from the sky, and We 
produce thereby the growth of all things. We produce from it greenery from which We 
produce grains arranged in layers. And from the palm trees - of its emerging fruit are 
clusters hanging low. And [We produce] gardens of grapevines and olives and 
pomegranates, similar yet varied. Look at [each of] its fruit when it yields and [at] its 
ripening. Indeed in that are signs for a people who believe. 
Pickthall: He it is Who sendeth down water from the sky, and therewith We bring 
forth buds of every kind; We bring forth the green blade from which We bring forth the 
thick-clustered grain; and from the date-palm, from the pollen thereof, spring pendant 
bunches; and (We bring forth) gardens of grapes, and the olive and the pomegranate, 
alike and unlike. Look upon the fruit thereof, when they bear fruit, and upon its 
ripening. Lo! herein verily are portents for a people who believe. 
Yusuf Ali: It is He Who sendeth down rain from the skies: with it We produce 
vegetation of all kinds: from some We produce green (crops), out of which We produce 
grain, heaped up (at harvest); out of the date-palm and its sheaths (or spathes) (come) 
clusters of dates hanging low and near: and (then there are) gardens of grapes, and 
olives, and pomegranates, each similar (in kind) yet different (in variety): when they 
begin to bear fruit, feast your eyes with the fruit and the ripeness thereof. Behold! in 
these things there are signs for people who believe. 
Shakir: And He it is Who sends down water from the cloud, then We bring forth with 
it buds of all (plants), then We bring forth from it green (foliage) from which We 
produce grain piled up (in the ear); and of the palm-tree, of the sheaths of it, come forth 
clusters (of dates) within reach, and gardens of grapes and olives and pomegranates, 
alike and unlike; behold the fruit of it when it yields the fruit and the ripening of it; most 
surely there are signs in this for a people who believe. 
Sam Guerrans: And He it is that sends down from the sky water; and We bring 
forth thereby the growth1 of all things; and We bring forth from it greenery, bringing 
forth from it grain heaped up; and from the date-palm, from its spathes, bunches of 
dates within reach; and gardens of grapevines and olives and pomegranates, similar yet © The Marvelous Quran 2024. 
This is copyrighted material. Duplication or copying or sharing without prior written approval is strictly prohibited. 
7 
 
different. Look upon the fruit thereof when it bears fruit and it ripens: in that are 
proofs2 for people who believe. 
Muhamad Asad: And He it is who has caused waters to come down from the sky; 
and by this means have We brought forth all living growth, and out of this have We 
brought forth verdure. Out of this do We bring forth close-growing grain; and out of the 
spathe of the palm tree, dates in thick clusters; and gardens of vines, and the olive tree, 
and the pomegranate: [all] so alike, and yet so different! Behold their fruit when it 
comes to fruition and ripens! Verily, in all this there are messages indeed for people who 
will believe! 
M.A.S. Abdul Haleem: It is He who sends down water from the sky. With it We 
produce the shoots of each plant, then bring greenery from it, and from that We bring 
out grains, one riding on the other in close-packed rows. From the date palm come 
clusters of low-hanging dates, and there are gardens of vines, olives, and pomegranates, 
alike yet different. Watch their fruits as they grow and ripen! In all this there are signs 
for those who would believe. 
Mohsin Khan: It is He Who sends down water (rain) from the sky, and with it We 
bring forth vegetation of all kinds, and out of it We bring forth green stalks, from which 
We bring forth thick clustered grain. And out of the datepalm and its spathe come forth 
clusters of dates hanging low and near, and gardens of grapes, olives and pomegranates, 
each similar (in kind) yet different (in variety and taste). Look at their fruits when they 
begin to bear, and the ripeness thereof. Verily! In these things there are signs for people 
who believe. 
Arberry: It is He who sent down out of heaven water, and thereby We have brought 
forth the shoot of every plant, and then We have brought forth the green leaf of it, bringing 
forth from it close -compounded grain, and out of the palm -tree, from the spathe of it, 
dates thick-lustered, ready to the hand, and gardens of vines, olives, pomegranates, like 
each to each, and each unlike to each. Look upon their fruits when they fructify and ripen! 
Surely, in all this are signs for a people who do believe. 
 
 
  © The Marvelous Quran 2024. 
This is copyrighted material. Duplication or copying or sharing without prior written approval is strictly prohibited. 
8 
 
Marvelous QurꜤān Translation of Āya 6:99: 
وَهُوَٱلََِّّى   نزَلَ مِنَ 
َ
أٱ لسَّمَا ءِ  مَا ءً فَ خْرَ 
َ
أجْنَا  بِهِ ۦ ِ شََْءٍ فَ 
نَبَاتَ كُل خْرَجْنَا 
َ
أ مِنْهُ خَضًِِا نَُّْ رِجُ  مِنْهُ حَبًّا  
مُّتَََاكِبًا    
وَمِنَ  ٱلنَّخْلِ   مِن طَلْعِهَا قِنْوَانٌ دَانِيَةٌ    
وَ عْنَابٍ 
َ
جَنََّٰتٍ ملِنْ أ    
وَ ٱ لزَّيْتُونَ    
وَ ٱ لرُّمَّانَ  مُشْتَبِهًا  وَغَيَْْ مُتَشََٰبِهٍ    
ٱنظُرُو ا  إِلَََٰ  ثَمَرِهِ ۦ   ثْمَرَ وَيَنْعِهِ 
َ
إِذَا  أ   
إِنَّ فِِ ذََٰلِكُمْ لََ يََٰتٍ للِقَوْمٍ يُؤْمِنُونَ  (6:99( 
And it is he who made accessible from the abstract understanding (of the Torah) 
divine guidance, and we brought out, using it, the growth of all things (in the 
scripture). And then, we brought out from it fresh understanding from which we 
bring out ‘grains’, riding on each other;  
And from the sifted stories of messengers and prophets - of its fronds (spathes) – 
clusters that are approaching and easy to reach;  
And (we bring out) abodes of understanding of ‘grapevines’ (vines carrying 
bunches of ripe grapes, i.e., collections of mature concepts);  
And (we bring out) the ‘olives’;  
And (we bring out) ‘Rum-mān’ (rectified, corrected stories) that are (by the) 
skeptical and dissimilar (to prior versions of such stories). Look at its fruit when it 
ripens and (also look at) its burgeoning1.  
Indeed, in those things that are yours, are signs for a people who believe. 
  
 
1 putting forth buds, flowers, shoots, etc. © The Marvelous Quran 2024. 
This is copyrighted material. Duplication or copying or sharing without prior written approval is strictly prohibited. 
9 
 
Understanding the Metaphor of the Pomegranate 
 
The best way to consume Pomegranate (and 
many other fruits), while avoiding the peel, the 
bitter pulp, and the annoying seeds, is  
to press it into juice! 
  
© The Marvelous Quran 2024. 
This is copyrighted material. Duplication or copying or sharing without prior written approval is strictly prohibited. 
10 
 
Sūrah Al-Ɛassr (Sūrah 103) (The Pressing) 
Reminder: Difference between Truthfulness and Truth 
103:1 وَٱلْعَصِْ     
An oath) By the pressing (i.e., extracting the Truth out of the Truthfulness of the QurꜤān): 
103:2 إِنٱِنسََٰنَ 
لْْ لَفِِ خُسٍْْ  
Indeed, the divinely guidable man is bound for loss, 
103:3 إِٱلََِّّينَ  ءَامَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا ٱلصََّٰلِحََٰتِ  وَتَوَاصَوْا بِ ٱلَْْقلِ  وَتَوَاصَوْا بِ ٱلصَّبِْ     
Except those who believed, and toiled in accordance with the proper lexicon, and counseled each 
other towards the Truth, and counsel each other towards patience. 
 
  © The Marvelous Quran 2024. 
This is copyrighted material. Duplication or copying or sharing without prior written approval is strictly prohibited. 
11 
 
CONCLUSION: Key Lessons For Those Who Reflect 
1. Metaphors in the QurꜤān are rich with meanings, but patience and 
perseverance must be applied to understand them! 
2. Divine guidance is from Allahh! 
3. The Malā’ikah help us arrange our Weltanschauung – reciprocating the 
blessings! 
4. There is a difference between Truth and Truthfulness! 
5. The Traditional Superficial Understanding of the QurꜤān did not ascribe to 
Allahh his due reverence, and deprived many of the profound understanding 
of the QurꜤān! 